# Productivity Hacks

1. **Plan your week on Sunday night.**You don’t need to come up with a detailed hour-by-hour schedule but spending a few minutes on the weekend planning what you hope to accomplish during the week can be a great way to set yourself up for success come Monday morning. Divide the responsibilities you have for the week onto specific days.  This practice will give you a good idea of what your workweek will look like,  sand it will help you know whether or not you have time to take on additional projects.

1. **Start the day with water.** Your first instinct in the morning might be to reach for a cup of coffee, but you’re much better off if you reach for a glass of water instead. When you first wake up, you’re often dehydrated because you spent the whole night not consuming any fluids. Add a cup of coffee on top of that, and you’re actually becoming more dehydrated, thanks to the diuretic effect of all that much-needed caffeine—making it even harder for your body to get going. Kick things off with a big glass of water in the morning before making the switch to coffee—you’ll feel refreshed and get your day off to a much better start.

1. **Eat breakfast**. You know how your mom always told you that breakfast is the most important meal of the day? She was right. Having breakfast jump-starts your metabolism and lets your body know that it’s time to get things done. 
2. **Schedule a weekly or biweekly “maintenance day” where you say no to additional commitments and instead focus on tasks you need to finish for your home.**

1. **Create a visual “chain” of consistency.** Back when Jerry Seinfeld was a touring comic, he used a calendar system called “Don’t break the chain.” He marked each day on a calendar that he worked toward a goal. As you mark the days, you will not only track your progress but also appreciate the daily work you have put into your aspirations. After a while you’ll have a long “chain” of days where you’ve completed a specific task or taken another step toward your goals. 

1. **Kick-start the morning with exercise.** Exercising in the morning can be a quick way to get your blood moving and your brain awake and ready for action. You don’t have to go to the gym for a full-on early morning workout, but even something as simple as a fifteen-minute run around your neighborhood or a brief cardio routine at home is enough to get your heart rate up and let your body know that it’s time to be up and moving.
2. **Create six “big picture” goals for the day.** These can include both professional and personal goals. For instance, one of your goals might be to finish a big work project, while another might be to start planning your upcoming family vacation. The idea here is for you to give yourself a “big picture” vision of what you hope to accomplish so you can better steer your daily schedule and yourself toward those goals.

1.  **Break your to-do list down into small, actionable steps.** For instance, instead of putting something like “work on the Rogers project” on your to-do list, break the task down into smaller, more specific steps like “email the Rogers client,” “schedule a call with Smith about the Rogers project,” and “research stats for the Rogers project.” By breaking down the larger item, you’re thinking through the details of what needs to get done. You’ll also feel a lot more accomplished when you’ve knocked off ten items from your to-do list before lunch rather than none because you’re still working on that same large task.
2.  **Set ninety-day goals rather than yearly ones.** Everything can change in a year. While many of us spend the beginning of the year creating goals for what we hope to accomplish by December 31, it’s better to set goals you’d like to finish by March 31 instead.

1.  Eat right. You’ve probably heard the saying “You get out of something what you put into it.” That goes for your body as well. One of the cornerstones of being your most productive self is eating well. While grabbing a burger or takeout might be your fastest option, you’re much better off ensuring that you eat healthy, nutritious meals that give your body and your mind the right kind of fuel to get things done throughout the day. After all, you are what you eat!
2. **Give each day a theme.** When each day has its own theme, it’s easier to create your schedule for the week, stay on task, and make sure none of the aspects of your job are overshadowed by another.
3. **Leave your car keys with important materials you need to bring with you.** You can’t be productive when you’ve left crucial items behind. Keeping your keys with those items ensures that when you’re on the hunt for the keys in the morning, you’ll be reminded to bring those important things with you when you head off to work.
4. **Think through what you want to say in emails before you type them out.**
5. **Create an evening routine for what you do right before bed. Routines aren’t just for your workday. An evening routine can help put your body in the mindset for bed so you fall asleep much faster. For instance, you might take the dog out for a quick stroll at eight thirty p.m., then have a cup of tea at nine p.m. and read a chapter of a book to wind down. The more you stick to your routine, the more you’ll get used to it and the easier it will become.**
6. **Don’t be a multitasker.** A study by Stanford researchers found that people who multitasked were more distracted and had a harder time remembering what they were doing than those who didn’t multitask. Instead of doing two or more things simultaneously, do one task and then move on to the next. By giving each task your complete focus, you’ll do a better job and get everything done faster.
7. **Give yourself plenty of access to natural light during the day.**
8. **Take a cold shower.** Yes, hot showers are far more enjoyable; however, cold showers are known to increase your alertness and improve your immune system and circulation while also easing stress. If you find yourself in need of a focus or energy boost, try taking a five- to ten-minute cold shower to get your blood flowing. When you’re done, you’ll feel refreshed and ready to tackle the rest of your day.
9. **Follow the two-minute** rule. In general, if tasks come along that can be done in two minutes or less, you should do them immediately. The act of adding an item to your to-do list and coming back to it later will take up the better part of two minutes anyway. Completing tasks immediately will keep your to-do list short and your day moving along.
10. **Learn how to speed-read.** Being able to process large amounts of text in short periods of time can dramatically increase your productivity and give you more time to focus on other tasks.
11. **Practice a self-affirming exercise**. At the end of each day, ask yourself if you think you gave that day your best effort. If you did, then this is a great way to motivate yourself to be even more productive tomorrow. If you didn’t, then you can pinpoint places where you had trouble during the day and focus on overcoming those obstacles tomorrow. When you constantly strive to do your best, it shows. Strive to have more and more days where you can say you did the best you could!
12. **Take a personal day.** If your personal to-do list starts to get out of hand, consider taking a day off from work to tackle it. The whole point of taking a vacation is to cut down on stress. If your personal stress is starting to become too much to handle, then taking a vacation day to knock things off your to-do list can actually help you de-stress better than taking a day off to relax on the beach.
13. If you start to get discouraged about something, list the reasons why you’re doing that thing in the first place.
14. Take a virtual walk in someone else’s shoes. If you’re starting to feel burned out on a particular project, look at it from a different person’s perspective (perhaps the person you’re completing the task for). Remembering why your project matters can be just what you need to reach the finish line
15. **Use your calendar for everything, not just specific appointments or meetings.** If you use your calendar just for scheduling meetings, you can quickly run into a situation where you don’t have time to accomplish other tasks. Use your calendar to block off time for projects, just as if you were scheduling a meeting, so you have a clearer grasp of when you have time for new tasks or meetings